title: .Net Developers: Learn Typescript!
date: 2017/04/15
---

I've been a .Net developer since 2002. I always hoped C# would run everywhere.

That will never happen.

### Because: Browsers

JavaScript is the only language that can run in the browser. (But keep reading there is hope.)

Now, Microsoft tried to make C# work in the browser. Silverlight looked like it might be the solution. Microsoft even got NBC to stream the 2008 olympics using silverlight. https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/somasegar/2008/01/07/2008-olympics-brought-to-you-by-silverlight/

### So what happened?

Smart phones

Silverlight was a browser plugin and it simply would not work on mobile. (Performance and security being major issues.)

So Microsoft did the only thing they could do to it's platform with a broken leg...

For those paying attention, Silverlight began dying around 2011. 

This post by Scott Hanselman is what made me pay attention:

https://www.hanselman.com/blog/ShouldIUseHTML5OrSilverlightOneMansOpinion.aspx

### That is why Microsoft created Typescript. 

Typescript started development internally at Microsoft around 2010, about the same time everyone recognized that Silverlight was doomed. 

I imagine the conversation went something like this:

- Apple won't let us install Silverlight on iPhones!
- But Windows Phones!
- Right... so silverlight is dead... Solutions?
- Well JavaScript runs everywhere... What if we fixed Javascript?!?
- Hmm... I have an idea...


Finally in 2012, Microsoft released the first version of Typescript. Typescript was a superset of JavaScript that added type checking, autocomplete, code navigation, and renaming of variables. But, it would transpile to plain JavaScript and so it would work in every browser. Although it wasn't nearly as nice as C# when 0.8 came out, it was a great improvement over Javascript development. 

Also, because of Phone Gap (Cordova), there was a way to create hybrid mobile apps with JavaScript.

### Tyepscript: Code Once - Run Everywhere

So immediately, Typescript became the best way to code once and run everywhere. (Though hybrid apps proved to have a serious performance problem and so PhoneGap turned out not to be the perfect solution after all. However, now there are frameworks like React Native and NativeScript that run JavaScript code with native UI and solve the performance problem of hybrid apps.)

In fact, now I believe Typescript is better than C#. I can code the same product in half the code and half the time in Typescript. Also, with solutions like ReactXP, it is possible to deploy the exact same code as a web app running in any browser or as a high performance native mobile app with all the extra platform features enabled.

In fact, Microsoft seems to agree that Typescript is a perfect language for even high performance desktop apps: 

Visual Studio Code is written in Typescript. 

If you have used it, you know the code editor is much faster than Visual Studio. Although it doesn't have all the enterprise level features in Visual Studio, for coding it is better.

Anyway, I predict that .net will continue to fade as Typescript/JavaScript continues to dominate. This is especially true for app development both on the web and native or desktop.

### C# is Still Strong

However, there are 2 areas where C# is still strong (mainly due to high performance needs):

- Game Development with Unity 
- Server side with Asp.Net Core

Although, both of these domains can be solved with Typescript, the high performance needs make it difficult for a JavaScript engine to compete. 

### C# is better for Game Development

For game development, JavaScript engines simply cannot maintain a stable 60 fps. C# in Unity is a clear winner for this case today (although, I would like to try TypeScript to UnityScript and compare it).

### C# is sometimes better for Web Servers (Sometimes worse)

For web servers, Node.js is great, but for raw performance Asp.Net Core is about 20x faster. (Note: This is only true for Asp.Net Core. The old Asp.Net was about the same speed as Node.js.) 

However, in most cases, raw performance is not nearly as important as a scalable architecture or developer productivity. 

Node.js can still be ideal in many situations. The one case where C# is a clear win is when dealing with traditional relational databases (SQL databases). Linq and Entity Framework are excellent for relational data. 

However if dealing with NoSQL or json, Node.js written in Typescript is a clear win. C# is horrible at consuming json. Using dynamic offers no help at all in C#. However, with typescript, it's simple to define an interface for the expected json data structure and get all the nice autocomplete and type checking needed for quick coding. When consuming an external web API or json data, typescript with node.js is the winner in developer productivity.

As for scalability purposes: node scales just as well as .net running in the cloud, so that doesn't really matter.


So although there are a few situations where C# can outperform Typescript, Typescript is better in terms of cross platform portability, developer productivity, library availability, and language features.

### C# is not - Typescript is

C# is not the cross platform language you are looking for.

Typescript is.